README.md, before:

# Common DevX

> Updated on 2025-07-29 by @KemingHe

Open templates and AI prompts to accelerate project setup, improve documentation quality, and standardize team workflows for AI-assisted development.

## 📋 Overview

- **Accelerate project setup**: Ready-to-use templates eliminate documentation setup time
- **Improve documentation quality**: Structured templates ensure consistency across projects
- **Standardize team workflows**: GitHub and meeting templates reduce onboarding costs
- **Zero dependencies**: Pure markdown templates with no installation requirements

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Step 1: Browse Templates

Navigate directories to find relevant templates for your project needs.

### Step 2: Copy Files

Download or copy specific `.md` files directly to your project without cloning the repository.

### Step 3: Customize Content

Replace placeholder content with your project-specific information.

### Step 4: Automate with AI

Feed prompts to AI assistants along with templates for automated generation.

## 📁 Project Structure

```plaintext
common-devx/
├── .github/                    # GitHub workflow templates
│   ├── ISSUE_TEMPLATE/         # Bug reports and feature requests
│   └── PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/  # PR description templates
├── meetings/                   # Team communication templates
├── prompts/                    # AI assistant prompts for automation
├── contacts.md                 # Team contact information template
└── README.md                   # Project documentation
```

## 🛠️ Development

- **Maintainer**: [@KemingHe](https://github.com/KemingHe) continues adding templates from ongoing work
- **Template source**: Generic versions of best practices with PII removed
- **Resource approach**: Designed as reference dump rather than active development framework

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](./LICENSE) - a permissive license that allows free use, modification, and distribution with attribution.

## 📞 Support

- **Questions**: Reference existing [GitHub](./.github/), [contacts](./contacts.md), and [meeting](./meetings/) templates and [prompts](./prompts/) for implementation guidance
- **Enhancement requests**: [Submit suggestions](https://github.com/KemingHe/common-devx/issues) through GitHub issue templates
- **Target users**: Developers, teams, and organizations using AI-assisted workflows

Commit message:

fix(github): move PR template for proper recognition
CHANGES
- Move pull_request_template.md from .github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/ to .github/
- Add YouTube demo link to README introduction
- Improve meeting template formatting with checkbox syntax and transcription notes
- Update template version numbers for meeting agenda and memo

IMPACT
- GitHub now properly recognizes and displays PR template for contributors
- Users can watch video demonstration of commit message generation workflow
- Meeting templates provide clearer task tracking and transcription guidance

README.md, after:

# Common DevX

> Updated on 2025-07-29 by @KemingHe

Open templates and AI prompts to accelerate project setup, improve documentation quality, and standardize team workflows for AI-assisted development. [[Watch demo on YouTube]](https://youtu.be/Mfx0DFsCcTw)

## 📋 Overview

- **Accelerate project setup**: Ready-to-use templates eliminate documentation setup time
- **Improve documentation quality**: Structured templates ensure consistency across projects
- **Standardize team workflows**: GitHub and meeting templates reduce onboarding costs
- **Zero dependencies**: Pure markdown templates with no installation requirements

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Step 1: Browse Templates

Navigate directories to find relevant templates for your project needs.

### Step 2: Copy Files

Download or copy specific `.md` files directly to your project without cloning the repository.

### Step 3: Customize Content

Replace placeholder content with your project-specific information.

### Step 4: Automate with AI

Feed prompts to AI assistants along with templates for automated generation.

## 📁 Project Structure

```plaintext
common-devx/
├── .github/                    # GitHub workflow templates
│   ├── ISSUE_TEMPLATE/         # Bug reports and feature requests
│   └── PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/  # PR description templates
├── meetings/                   # Team communication templates
├── prompts/                    # AI assistant prompts for automation
├── contacts.md                 # Team contact information template
└── README.md                   # Project documentation
```

## 🛠️ Development

- **Maintainer**: [@KemingHe](https://github.com/KemingHe) continues adding templates from ongoing work
- **Template source**: Generic versions of best practices with PII removed
- **Resource approach**: Designed as reference dump rather than active development framework

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](./LICENSE) - a permissive license that allows free use, modification, and distribution with attribution.

## 📞 Support

- **Questions**: Reference existing [GitHub](./.github/), [contacts](./contacts.md), and [meeting](./meetings/) templates and [prompts](./prompts/) for implementation guidance
- **Enhancement requests**: [Submit suggestions](https://github.com/KemingHe/common-devx/issues) through GitHub issue templates
- **Target users**: Developers, teams, and organizations using AI-assisted workflows
